B.3 Sharing

# Sharing

Sonic Pi is all about sharing and learning with each other. 

Once you've learned how to code music, sharing your compositions is as
simple as sending an email containing your code. Please do *share* your
code with others so they can *learn* from your work and even use parts
in a new *mash-up*. 

If you're unsure of the best way to share your work with others I
recommend putting your code on [GitHub](https://github.com) and your
music on [SoundCloud](https://soundcloud.com). That way you'll be able
to easily reach a large audience.

## Code -> GitHub

[GitHub](https://github.com) is a site for sharing and working with
code. It's used by professional developers as well as artists for
sharing and collaborating with code. The simplest way to share a new piece
of code (or even an unfinished piece) is to create a
[Gist](https://gist.github.com). A [Gist](https://gist.github.com) is a
simple way of uploading your code in a simple way that others can see,
copy and share.

## Audio -> SoundCloud

Another important way of sharing your work is to record the audio and
upload it to [SoundCloud](https://soundcloud.com). Once you've uploaded
your piece, other users can comment and discuss your work. I also
recommend placing a link to a [Gist](https://gist.github.com) of your
code in the track description.

To record your work, hit the `Rec` button in the toolbar, and
recording starts immediately.  Hit `Run` to start your code if
it isn't already in progress.  When you're done recording, press the
flashing `Rec` button again, and you'll be prompted to enter a
filename.  The recording will be saved as a WAV file, which can be
edited and converted to MP3 by any number of free programs (try
Audacity for instance).

## Hope

I encourage you to share your work and really hope that we'll all teach
each other new tricks and moves with Sonic Pi. I'm really excited by
what you'll have to show me.
